---
title: "Static content today, real-time tomorrow?"
pubDatetime: 2025-05-03T17:55:30-05:00
description: "Patiently waiting for Astro's live loaders while investigating a CMS I may or may not need."
tags:
  - dev notes
  - Astro
  - Strapi
---

# Astro SSR content collections

The Astro v5 [content layer] is proving to be awesome. I use it to pull my [bookmarks](/bookmarks) from [Raindrop]. This
is a build-time solution, meaning changes in content require a new build to show up. This is fine for a lot of content,
but for the content that updates often, then this isn't the right tool. (I would consider the fact that this _content_
might actually be _data_, but that's a grey area that's a whole different
can of worms.)

For my bookmark use case, I update them pretty infrequently, so the classic strategy of using a web hook to trigger a
build when there's an update would suffice. However, Raindrop doesn't have a hook. I update bookmarks so infrequently
though that I could just brute force having a build run every day and it'll be fine.

But, driven by cat-killing curiosity, I dove deeper into Astro's content layer for the sake of learning more.

I started cooking up what I'd want in a SSR-styled content layer, which would get you some more real-time responses. I
had a loose idea of the same API as the SSG content loaders so the `fetch` logic is contained, but with some caching of
the results. Astro's data layer already has build-time caching built in, but this would likely have to leverage SWR in a
way that the loader honors.

And then of course, those Barry White drums started kicking and Nas started rapping.

> No idea's original. There's nothing new under the sun.
> 
> ~ Nas

Yea, Astro already thought of this.

The combination of the [Live Loaders] and [Route caching] proposals on the roadmap effectively gives you that utopia I
was thinking.

Awesome.

# CMS debates

I'm typing this blog post directly into a markdown file checked into my repo and Astro will render that on the next
build. Gets the job done.

I kind of like the writing experience of just opening up a `.md` file. I don't think it's a very popular style of
writing though. I couldn't tell a marketing copywriter "Just push your markdown to the main branch and you'll be fine."

I had that thought earlier this week and realized my CMS experience is limited to using its APIs and rendering its
content. But I never authored in one since I'm always just pushing markdown files. The one in-depth experience I've had
in the authoring side of a CMS (Sanity, specifically) was largely focused on trying to help the company understand that
a CMS is not a database. Meaning it wasn't the most productive experience.

So the latest project added to my never-ending project list is to move this blog to a true CMS.

I opted for Strapi, but it feels weird since I genuinely like writing in markdown files. I'm not using any of Strapi's
[dynamic zone] functionality, which makes me think I shouldn't be using Strapi at all.

If you just want to write markdown in a file and you're comfortable with `git`, is there a benefit to using a CMS?
We'll see. 

# New ideas and maybe-laters

- Discovered Paul Bratslavsky's [strapi-community-astro-loader], which makes Astro + Strapi a simple exercise in the
  process of working through the above. Currently working on helping the [integration even tighter].
- I'm curious if there's a simple way for auto-creating Astro + Strapi webhook and preview routes. I remember a while
  back when I was investigating [auth-astro] (Astro + Auth.js) that it had a clever pattern for creating all the routes
  needed. I'm envisioning something similar for these routes.

[Live Loaders]: https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/issues/1151
[Route caching]: https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/issues/1140
[Raindrop]: https://raindrop.io/
[content layer]: https://web.archive.org/web/20250329191522/https://astro.build/blog/content-layer-deep-dive/
[dynamic zone]: https://docs.strapi.io/cms/features/content-manager#dynamic-zones
[integration even tighter]: https://github.com/PaulBratslavsky/strapi-community-astro-loader/issues/11
[auth-astro]: https://github.com/nowaythatworked/auth-astro
